greetings everyone
so um we're gonna go uh first proceed
with a Saturday morning gray area
Festival tradition
and how this works is I'm going to say
good morning and then nobody's going to
say anything and then I'm going to say
good morning louder and then everybody's
going to get you know
so like good morning everyone and you
say good morning thanks for being there
we go now we're
now are with us
um
who saw yacht last night
yay
uh it's a fantastic day yesterday I
don't know how many people were all here
all day yesterday we had some uh
wonderful talks all across the board and
are happy to be here again I don't know
if I have anything in terms of morning
announcements besides the uh
already completed audience engagement
um
so we're going to start out today with
sort of a recap of a project uh that a
huge project we undertook from like 2018
up until the beginning of 2020 uh which
was an artist lab the experiential space
research lab
group of 12 artists on a project that
was initially supported by the Knight
foundation and in conjunction with uh
spherical Studios slash guyan systems
who are going to have remotely on the
call
um which culminated in an exhibition
called the end of you
I'm going to start out here by showing a
very short documentary that was made by
a couple of great filmmakers
um Madame I don't remember my dog's last
name so I gotta look at it sorry uh
madovney apothea and Paul we let
um
to kind of give an overview of what
happened and then I have a couple of
short clips from
an artist who was kind of a
little bit of a patron saying of the
project Newton Harrison who with his
partner Helen Meyer Harrison down at the
center for the Force Major and um
Santa Cruz
visited the exhibition and I think had
some great quotes to short little
interview Clips to sort of um
frame our conversation here then I'll
invite up our panelists and we'll get
going so
here's the film
I think I think it sounds my fault
oh
gray area foundation for the Arts
catalyzes creative action for social
transformation in partnership with the
Knight Foundation we launched the
experiential space research lab to
explore the rising Trend in experiential
art and apply it towards some of the
most critical issues facing our world
the 11 selected artists spent six months
co-creating the interview an exhibition
that asks visitors to reimagine their
relations with other humans other
species and our living planet
[Music]
we're cataloging material evidence from
the past three thousand years of
humanity so the objects and things that
humans have created that will live
beyond us for years past by taking these
objects out of context and displaying
them next to each other in scenarios
that you would never see them the next
step is to investigate your behaviors
what we're trying to get you to think
about is like why they're here why we
use them why we've created them is this
object me who am I without it
[Music]
this is an immersive game of life it's
an immersive reimagining of Conway's
Game of Life but the simulation itself
is already living this is putting it
into the space and making it interactive
and responsive to human presence
your presence May alter in very
persistent ways but it too has a life of
its own that will change what you
experience in turn
[Music]
when we talk about the environment and
our relationship to it I think it's
really important to remember that these
aren't abstract Concepts there's no
better case study than Hunter's Point
because what makes it dangerous isn't
actually visible
they found another radioactive object
this whole project is an attempt to
visualize that radiation these lights
are actually completely made of the
headlines from the SF Bay View also
they're lit with the data from that
object that was found last September
my art has always included some aspect
of nature some aspect of geometry it was
inspired by a lot of experiences playing
outside playing with my own sense of
space playing with how I engaged the
world around me I play a lot with the
user's perception of space
I try to bring nature into technology
and try to approach the human
relationship with the environment
through technology
[Music]
I think that's the role of the artist is
to point at things that are present in
our realities but aren't always
something we tune into immersive
installation is one of these
opportunities to really take you out of
your usual experience and to disorient
you or reorient you to a new way of
thinking I wanted to allow people to
think beyond their ego and really
experience that feeling as you connect
to the larger living systems around you
[Music]
we need to be humble in our appreciation
of where we are in this world
what came out of the Space Age one of
the biggest findings that is rarely
acknowledged is the idea that the Earth
is alive and the notion of the Earth
being alive and self-regulating was
something that we've been exploring
asking ourselves how can we think like a
living planet what are the implications
for thinking of all of ourselves as a
Consortium all of ourselves as part of
nested scales of this larger system as
well as being Consortium of all of these
other species and organisms inside of us
and what are the implications of that in
terms of how we're relating to the world
and what role can art really help to
play in really starting to dissolve and
transcend those boundaries
it's the end of you and the beginning of
us
[Music]
did I just break everything no well no I
didn't
um
so cool uh you can see there's a lot
that go on there it really transformed
the space
um
I just wanted to like I said play a
couple of these small clips from Newton
Harrison who visited the exhibition if
you don't know his work with Helen Meyer
Harrison definitely take a look they've
been doing environmental
um
artworks for you know more than 50 years
so
um just a couple short words by our pal
Newton who also gave a keynote at one of
the gray area festivals I guess it was
either 2016 or 2017.
question can how do you go about
encouraging the Regeneration of the Gulf
of New Mexico
you see that's the scale we've got to
get at
um
if I have a critique of all art shows
not this this one
it's that we haven't yet found the way
to jump out of the gallery and into the
real world
Helen and I actually have we actually
have done this but uh
and we're successful at it but we have
to say that out of 50 years work four
pieces are successful about it
you know what I mean I don't want to I I
I I believe itself praise but I also
don't believe in making something bigger
than it really is and we found real hard
to to break out Sweden does this
they've invited us to redesign their
country from an ecological perspective
we suddenly understood no one would buy
our work why what rich person wants on
his wall somebody tell who tells them
they're up the environment and
change now
you know they don't want to see that so
so we decided to um
focus on the real world stuff
commissions like that and we decided to
focus on the on critics and if you look
at the at 100 books on on this field
Helen and I'll be in about 60 or 70 of
them because we decided to play for the
intelligence and not play for the glory
and then Glory came by anyway
but it then the thing about glory is
very peculiar because from say like 1976
to 79 we were in 150 group shows
everybody want a piece of it 1980 Regan
comes in takes out the money and we have
one show
so our field is very fickle so why do
you think that it's important for you to
approach that kind of subject through
ART as opposed to because you could be a
public planner or like oh no yeah
no I couldn't find that well one could
approach this no not me well under any
circuits I'm asking about you I will
answer that
if I am any of those things other people
control my agenda if I'm an artist I
make the agenda or Helen and I when
we're working together and therefore
um it's entirely different from being in
a in a field that has rules I make my
own
and you can see it piece by piece that's
the that's the that's why it's okay to
be poor what what where's your payoff
um the payoff is you you're you're a
free agent on top of that you're paid to
do what nature does everything in life
improvises its existence so do we
artists if you take a look at the
Bauhaus problems which I taught from I
taught Albert's course at Yale and other
things like that
um I knew Albers and I knew some of the
vallejo's people that's actually helped
all right there there's Newton
um invite my panelists up here to
join me we got where are you are you are
they here I don't know
uh we have our uh
a couple of artists from the from the
project
Julia pinkkuzvich Uh Kevin Moultrie die
and our creative development director at
gray area Nikki selkin
[Music]
um
and we're just going to talk about this
thing oh and I'm sorry remotely from the
Beyond uh is David mcconville and Don
Danby of uh spherical
behind us very looming largely
um
so
um just quickly for the start of this
project so Knight Foundation asked us to
if everybody remember it can like rewind
a couple of years ago
um there's Museum of ice cream there's
the van Gogh there was this surge in
immersive exhibitions
um and that's interesting for a couple
of reasons and one of those is it
signaled this shift from people
interested in objects to people
interested in environments and like
what's that mean you know for museums
and you know institutions the other
thing was it's the first time that I've
seen that people would line up around
the block to pay you know uh
fifty dollars to get into an exhibition
and so there was this idea that there
was this new Revenue stream for artists
that were coming
um
and the the punch line of this whole
thing is that we opened it in February
of 2020 and then we'll talk about like
what that means in relation to today but
maybe Nikki could talk just a little bit
about the process leading up to when we
started the lab kind of what we did and
yeah so um we like Barry had said we'd
gotten a grant from the Knight
Foundation to explore experiential
spaces which is like immersive
environments and there was a huge Trend
everything from the Museum of Ice Cream
downtown to meow wolf
um employing you know hunt tens of and
hundreds even of artists from our local
community full time which was like such
a big a big change for people living
hand to mouth and so we we did a bunch
of research we sent out surveys
um to all of the artists in the
community and and patrons as well people
that go see these immersive experiences
and pop-up museums and try to kind of
take away some findings around like what
were the types of experiences that were
most popular we actually have a pretty
good data set of research on this which
was super exciting and meaningful at the
time and then we also did an open call
where we found was it 12 13 12 yeah 12
artists who we picked from all different
disciplines uh to create a collaborative
immersive experience over the course of
not quite a year I want to say six
months eight months maybe and the the
catch the best part about it was we
asked them all to come up with an idea
in the application that they wanted to
do and then as soon as they we selected
them we're like now throw it in the
trash and you're gonna work on something
totally new and you're gonna find it out
together and the theme which was living
systems which is how we brought in Dawn
and David
to help us understand what that meant so
that's kind of like the background and
the framing to where when the lab
started yeah maybe uh David and Dawn I
maybe could
recollect a little bit what the uh
process was about and the thing that we
did is the you know the night Foundation
Grant was about these experiential
spaces but then somehow we had to make
it like more complicated than we needed
to right and so it wasn't just that we
wanted to make an immersive exhibition
but try and think about what the format
of these immersive exhibitions could
communicate in a way that was beyond
what some more you know typical theme
music typical forms well even or objects
in a museum or like you know what can be
communicated through this form
thematically
um I don't know spherical do you have
any
how did I don't remember how did this
happen you know
we've always got thoughts
um well I think Barry we were discussing
for some time the gaian systems project
that we'd been working on with Bruce
Clark who's a bit of a historian of the
history of cybernetics and we were
discussing sort of the
connection between cybernetic research
and a lot of what had been emerging with
media art in the 1960s with cybernetic
Serendipity sort of the origins of AI
and all kinds of things but that was
also feeding into this emerging realm of
planetary Sciences particularly Earth
system science and the influence of
cybernetics on the thinking of James
Lovelock and Lynn margulis and we were
really trying to tease out these you
know Common origins in a way that hadn't
necessarily been explicitly connected in
various ways most of the time people
think of Gaia Theory as kind of a you
know almost like a spiritual religious
kind of commitment to The Living Planet
when in fact it was extraordinarily deep
science that was challenging a lot of
the ideas of what Earth was at the time
and so we were in discussion around what
does it mean to sort of explore that to
examine that in the Contemporary context
especially with the capacities that
we've gotten now for experiential media
art it just seemed like a good match for
what was going on but there was also an
aspect of
um of the fact that the work in guyan
systems was really trying to understand
how living systems on the planet
function with humans as part of them and
the really like trying to actually in
some respects contend with the fact that
um that climate narratives were starting
to come through and and being expressed
through the through the Arts in multiple
ways but they're they were Rife with
cliches and um and a lot of the time
backed by simplistic understandings of
like actually the weirder more
interesting ways that the planet in fact
works and so it was kind of an
opportunity we thought to get underneath
some of that not be talking just bluntly
about climate and climate activism but
actually like what what are the like
weirder dynamics that are happening at
all layers of the planet for micro macro
that enable us to even be asking these
questions so that that kind of um there
was a bit of a reaction against a kind
of
uh cliche that you know that Gaia Theory
itself has succumbed to over the years
because it's sort of been as David was
saying gets thought of as like more kind
of spiritual or woo as opposed to like
hardcore research and how could we
explore some of that research play with
it and how might a group of artists some
of whom would encounter these ideas some
of you never had
um use those as jumping off points to
for their for their own Collective
Explorations yeah I think it's a great
point of
starting out trying to not have it be
some sort of cliche reimagining of what
maybe the cultural you know I don't know
mainstream conception of what guy in
theory would look like it's like and so
to undertake that as Nikki said what we
kind of had to do is throw everything
away from the outset and undertake a
deeply collaborative process of design
um that like I said we we as gray area
really didn't do too much on curation in
this group of artists co-generated and
entirely new and cohesive exhibition
concept from the group
um
and and it's something that like can't
happen uh you know we've spent two years
on Zoom or whatever it's really the kind
of thing that's impossible to happen
that way I think everybody had to be in
this so I'm gonna ask you know I don't
know whoever has thoughts first but to
talk a little bit about that process and
like
I have no thoughts no thought well yeah
um I mean I think I think
it's just is it on yeah so I mean I
think I think that the thing that's
that's interesting to me is kind of like
because we came on as Nicky already said
kind of with our own individual concepts
of what we had wanted to do in the space
and by the virtue of throwing out all of
that stuff and having to kind of
reconstitute a new you know seamless
cohesive perfect
Collective Vision I think that um
it's it's interesting to me because
looking back that is such an explicitly
non-hybrid way of working like before
the zoom calls before the pandemic and
stuff like that it like like you just
said it would have been impossible but
it also kind of left left us room to
also really really rethink you know how
we as artists really want to like how
how much of an abstraction are we going
to make out of these issues that are
like really rooted in research and
really rooted in science and how are we
going to like communicate that out to
people I think that I think that that
that process both of stripping back our
own preconceptions of what we wanted to
do and then this kind of added dimension
of like
what level of you know education is this
project going to exist at like is this
going to be completely descriptive is
this going to be a project that's
essentially mapping is it going to be a
project that's essentially like a
complete abstraction is it going to be a
project that's projective about like
some sort of possible future and I think
that like that level of brainstorming
um in this kind of environment in this
kind of experiential field is something
that that was incredibly challenging and
and was a large part of the process was
really just like figuring out not only
how do you know it's like hurting cats
right like not only like 12 completely
different completely individualized
completely actualized people think about
this thing but then also how are we
going to distill not just all of that
energy but the actual concept into
something that's not just digestible but
engageable right so it's not just about
it being like oh I get it the planet is
an organism it's also about like okay
but what do we do with it like how do we
talk to the plan how do we communicate
with those things and I think that that
that was probably the the biggest Step
at least for me
yeah just to add to that I think
[Music]
the goal initially was to make something
that was neither didactic nor
um
solely
um losing my train of thought a little
bit I I think what we we really didn't
want it to be just about spectacle which
I think a lot of immersive art
weighs heavy on and so of course it was
interesting it was important to us to
make an exhibition that looked good and
was engaging but ultimately it wasn't
just about throwing data at you in
particular numbers I think we ultimately
landed at a place of trying to get to a
deeper both emotional feeling and kind
of intellectual understanding that went
just beyond the data sets we really
wanted to engage the individual with
these ideas and have you immerse in
these particular ideas in a way that
kind of left an impression and that it
wasn't just a statistic
yeah I mean I think
that's a good point about and I sort of
want to talk a little bit about what the
about the immersive format and like what
how that communicated what you wanted to
you know how that played into it but
um there was a very basic thing that was
the exhibition that was created called
the end of you and sort of the sub
headlines the beginning of us was this
determinant of the selfie Museum right
what place you just go to take pictures
of yourself in the set and then whatever
there's some social media socialization
on online or whatever
um
so it's kind of an anti-selfie Museum
because the purpose of this was to use
this environmental context
to expand from your sense of self to
other people and other species and then
a living planet through this kind of
Journey that was undertaken so I don't
um
might be a good to
talk about both of the installations you
made and how those you know came into
being through that yeah sure I mean I
think one thing that I want to say
really quickly about kind of the
comparison to the Museum of ice cream
and the selfie Museum and all the things
that were going on specifically here but
also just generally in the art world at
that time I think that
um something that's really interesting
to me looking back on on this project
before talking about like our specific
installs like is that something that I
always found fascinating about the
Museum of ice cream was how little
explanation it really required right and
and all of these all of these places
that you go to you don't go there and
you don't like have to like walk and
like read wall text and be like what's a
vanilla bean you know it's like you know
you already know what ice cream is you
know what a museum is and the Very
verbiage of the whole concept is really
immediately understandable and we were
we were really kind of tasked with like
okay but like we're not gonna have
something that's immediately reducible
to a single sentence to like wall text
right so we're working in this
intermediary between a typical art
installation where you have the ability
to have Wall tags to have descriptive
liner notes or whatever
um and and with a thing where it's like
how can we communicate this directly
through the art object through the
install without people having to read
something about it right
um so
um so in my specific case you know my my
project was all about
um the radioactivity
um that is still present to this very
day at Hunter's Point and it was It was
kind of inspired by conversations that I
had had with a lot of journalists from
the SF Bayview and other uh black
newspapers in the Bay Area about how
they've been talking about this
situation for a very very long time to
like literally shine a light on this
problem but it wasn't really until all
the money started pouring in to
redevelop Hunter's Point that people
started really looking into it and right
before
um we had actually started really
working on this project they had found
another radioactive object it was a deck
marker
um just like on the ground in Hunter's
points like highly radioactive and so my
my part of the install was kind of
focused on how do we communicate the
harm that this has to people without
making it like you know I always think
about like old older epic movies that
always start with like a a text
description where it's like the year is
1959 you know like the Soviets have just
you know and it's like how can I how can
I get that effect without having it to
be immediately you know like like how
can I get it to be immediate without it
being reductive I guess and so and so
the solution for me and I think a lot of
us looking back at our installs was I
created a series of these lanterns that
were kind of programmed to Blink on and
off with the help of somebody who very
incredible
here to help like she basically did it
Nikki soldered a lot of uh I spent I was
awake for like 24 hours at one point
with Michael my cell in the audience who
also we work together on the code we but
just to explain it real quick because
it's cool we found Kevin found the radio
frequency data from someone from the LA
Times of the signatures from the
radioactivity and we use that to
translate that into LED patterns into
the LED lanterns that were also from the
print there was like Vellum printed from
them yeah so like we on on these
lanterns that were made of this
semi-translucent Vellum we printed all
the headlines that people have been
printing about this problem for years
and years and years so it was like
the radioactivity and the work that had
already been done by these communities
was going to literally illuminate uh the
space in this did we get a Geiger
counters or no we had yeah we had an
actual geiger counter yeah it was cool
and a stolen sign that said to keep out
hunter's point I still have that side
yeah it's so cool unless the government
asked that I don't know he doesn't we
never saw that sign no it was here it
was awesome but but it's a documentary
yeah but I think the thing that was cool
about that piece too that Kevin made and
we like helped realize together was that
it visualized a literal data of harm
from a planetary time scale like like
toxic you know toxic a radioactive
material in a very both data specific
way but fun and interesting way because
it was like a really cool Lantern light
sculpture and also dealt with societal
harm you know it was dealing on a lot of
levels it was dealing with like
immediate societal harm and and it was
dealing with radioactive time scale and
and Earth you know Earth stuff that that
was something that Dave and um Don and
Jonathan were talking a lot about like
expanding time and I think and the last
thing I'll say is that I think what a
lot of us realized maybe even more
specifically you and I said there is
there was a part of what had to happen
ended up having to be descriptive in
some way shape or form and it was really
about leaving the right amount of room
for an individual or the audience to
engage either deeper or not so it's like
with mine specifically you could just
interact with it as like ooh pretty
lights or you could actually go up and
read the lanterns and be like oh okay
and like you could read the sign and and
really having that kind of like levels
of information from different distances
um and a lot of our projects
um including uh two people uh that are
not unfortunately here right now uh
Celeste and bees who are also part of a
collective or a formerly formerly part
of the former Collective called Space
Industries
um that uh that project was is all about
the you saw it in the documentary The
Museum of like human nature I think it
was called and and it's the archive yeah
and and I think it was uh it was really
incredible because you could just look
at it as a combination of like dildos
and barber chairs and all these other
things but if you really wanted to get
into it you know there's there's like
levels to it and I think your project
also had a very similar thing where it's
like their their layers of Engagement
and it's actually determining those
layers that I think really determines
how successful it is as an interactive
piece
there you go
so my project was titled the luxuriant
prolific undying and I think it was um
it came from the premise that
humans are somehow separate from nature
that we you know embody parts of the
world in society and then there's nature
and the pristine Natures over here in
Humanities over here and I felt like
that is a really
incorrect way of thinking about us we
are obviously part of the ecological
system and I and I wanted to build a
project around that premise of trying to
kind of reintegrate humanity back into
nature back into the living systems that
Earth is
you know that we are a part of and so
um
that I ended up realizing that what
ultimately is driving this idea of us
separate from nature is our egos and the
in order for us to be able to connect
more with our surroundings and our
non-human kin we need to work on
dissolving our egos a little bit and the
project ultimately took on the form of
essentially a death meditation
underneath two specific tree roots that
were sourced locally one was a cedar one
was an alder both of these trees have
very specific interconnected systems
they have a lot of medicinal properties
you know we can go on and on essentially
um people were invited to lay down or
sit next to these roots and literally
like smell the Earth on these things the
oils coming out of these roots and
um in well and then I had my wonderful
collaborators Don and David spherical
Studios worked on writing
um text and recording this really
beautiful audio guided meditation
essentially that led you through
a dissolution of your ego let's say
um and it was one was about five minutes
so you can kind of engage just a little
bit or one was a little deeper I think
it was 11 minutes where you really lay
down and the thing that I found
happening was a lot of people really did
kind of
lay down they relax a lot of people fell
asleep underneath these trees some
people even spent the night one time
um particularly difficult install day
rent is very high here yes
um
the trees were situated on about two
thousand pounds of salt as well and so
there's like this bed of salt that you
got to play with and everything was very
tactile but the materiality was very
specific
there was an array of Oak Galls that
were sourced from you know a local tree
that were kind of hung up like little
balls that kids like to play with but
then they kind of created the suspended
moment of animation
and uh
I'm not sure what else to say
well I mean I think I think something
that I always really liked about about
your piece that I think is is worth
mentioning is that like you know I can't
think of anything more different
from the Museum of ice cream then an ego
death meditation under a dying tree and
I think and I think that the the
challenge that we had right is is like
how to make you know experiencing your
ego dissolving as much fun as taking a
very good photo for the gram
um in a pit of sprinkles right and I
think that like one of the solutions
that you found that I think is really
different from one of the solutions that
I engaged with which was yours was a lot
about tactility right so it's about you
know there's a different material on the
ground there's some different material
in the air like with the smells and
there's a different material that you're
engaging with whereas mine was much more
closer to the spectacle side right it's
not something that people can even
really touch or can really engage with
except for visually right but in in such
a way that it would be difficult to to
I think a lot about the the infinity
rooms that popped up a lot
um during that time and how they're
designed not just for you to be able to
experience them but also for you to
photograph them take those photographs
home perpetuate that image and then like
kind of like reproduce itself but the
way that that the that my installation
was hung kind of made it difficult to
get a photo of it or it makes it
difficult to experience in that kind of
way right but at the same time is still
a highly visual highly spectacle process
right and so there are a couple of other
um installs that I'm just going to talk
briefly through because I think it's
it's important and they're not here but
you know Stephanie's install which was
kind of in this space which was like a
huge interactive multi-screen uh video
game that as you moved through the floor
on in the floor it kind of represented
Conroy's Game of Life for those Science
News out there and and so that was
another thing that was like hovering in
between actual tactility in terms of
material and then kind of like a virtual
visual tactility right because you're
not actually touching things but you're
changing things simply by moving through
there was like this geodesic dome
designed by orestis who which was like
had projected on it essentially like
this kind of Charles Eames
um you know like powers of 10 scaling up
and down the the with AI
yeah yeah it was AI um Landscapes where
he trained a model before we had Dolly
and mid-journey to um he fed it many
many images of Nature and then they had
there was one panel on the studio sick
Dome that had actual the images flipping
and then all the rest were AI models of
what the AI saw as nature right and so
and then and then as you saw in the
video the kind of electric force which
was like a projection on the sides of
the walls that kind of brought in this
kind of naturalized but also completely
synthesized environment into the the
space in general
Stevens yeah Steven did that and and so
I think like all of these have different
kind of ways of engaging and it was
really important to have all of those
different ways in different kind of
parts of the floor plan in order to like
get people to engage with all of them at
their respective level right so like
once again kind of setting up these
different levels and then and then the
archive which I already mentioned but
was also incredibly tactile like all of
that stuff was presented in a way where
it wasn't there was no barrier to entry
you could just pick something up you
could just take it and you could add
your own things and you can tag them and
write the date and the time and add them
to the archive in fact uh the person
that the the clip that you just showed
he tagged himself
he archived himself Newton Harrison yeah
archived himself yeah so that archive
was crowd sort there was a sort of
social component where the things in the
archive were crowdsourced from whoever
wanted to bring them in right and so I
think like speaking to kind of like this
meow wolf aspect of these kinds of
things it's not just the amount of
information that has to be considered
but also all of the different ways like
all of like engaging every single sense
right from smell and touch to visual to
auditory and we haven't even talked
about probably the most informative
piece
um I forgot what it what it was called
but the one that was in the um
the
um oh my gosh we're talking about
Kelly's Kelly's the why can I not think
of it room of relations room of
relations or the room of Revelations if
you yeah and talk about it real quick
thank you Zordon uh yeah sure Kelly um
Kelly would actually worked with Newton
and Helen for many years
um was exploring the concepts of uh
Earth jurisprudence rights of nature
this whole idea that we're in this you
know era of recognition of the sort of
the colonial legal nature of how we
think about personhood and the
absurdities of our ability to rent
corporations personhood in all these
various ways but the difficulties of
actually even relating to other entities
and beings that are non-human uh to see
their inherent personhood and a lot of
particularly indigenous communities
around the world have been focused on
and not just an interesting it's
actually like very conservative American
communities as well but looking at the
focus on how to Grant rights of uh
personhood to rivers and mountains and
forests and rice and Kelly's peace
really explore the various ways in which
that's been emerging over the past
number of years and and to just quickly
describe that install it was it was
probably the most informative of all of
this also like there were there were
like papers and documents so that you
could at your own Leisure like engage
with all the different kind of legal
ramifications and like the documents
related to the rights of Nature and
things like that along with another uh
kind of projected piece that was on
these series of like kind of fabric
sales that was also quite beautiful and
engaging but it like once again was
another way of engaging that was more
akin to like a library or like a reading
room than any of the pieces in this in
this main space right so it's like we
had all of these different ways so that
way the viewer the audience member could
kind of like attach to whatever it was
that they gravitated towards the most
and then having that consistent thread
through all of it so that way you could
you could kind of pick and choose yeah
then we should also men I I think the
last one we didn't mention was romy's
out in the registry which was the
registry which was a touch screen
installation that the you
um sort of assumed a new identity that
was you were kind of like went through a
survey question process and then got
this new identity that was some uh other
species that was related merged with
another species you merged with another
species yeah yeah
and then you became a hybrid and it
issued you an ID card right
ID card as like a tree so you'd be like
I really like trees and then it would
like use AI to like turn you into bark
and then to be like here's your new self
and I was like whoa yeah and that was
the first thing that you did actually
before you even came to all this other
stuff where you killed your ego and
stuff so I think I feel like it was like
a really it was It was kind of intense
the more I actually think about it yeah
it was intense
um
spherical I wanted to ask you both maybe
if you had any thoughts on the guided
meditation process since that was a big
part of the the whole experience but
also since you both
um
I think are folks who are most directly
still you know currently working in
tangible environmental projects in LA to
maybe talk for a second about how if at
all the experience of doing this
influenced what you're working on now or
thinking about the policy things you're
working on yeah we're happy to Riff on
that I mean I think it was it was such a
delight to be able to collaborate with
Yulia
um and also in Stephen who did a lot of
the the background projections and work
that he was doing so it was sort of a
piece
um that included you know four four
people with with Julia's uh installation
and sculpture with the trees kind of at
the center and so David Naya's as Ilya
was saying was we're working on the um
the audio and uh you can hear my my
voice completely distorted at the
beginning of that documentary that was
shared earlier but we
um what we were playing with as Julio
was saying was really along the the
lines of the dissolution between
um humans and other and like non-human
entities
um and it's you know we've many times
talked about the fact that this all was
happening and being installed at a time
when we were aware that there was this
pandemic kind of vaguely happening
culturally away from San Francisco and
so it had this this wild effect of like
very soon after we closed the show being
like we were lying on the ground in salt
breathing air next to other people
like uh not wearing masks I mean they
just the bizarre like turn that that
happened very very soon afterward and
have joked a lot about how it felt like
um by you know in effect writing and uh
a meditation that was from the voice of
the non-human other that we were
speaking as the kind of
non-human living systems in the planet
that what was it that we were summoning
through that the ritual of creating that
that peace and that experience for all
those people it's all your fault you did
this it
we've taken responsibility for it a
couple times
and appreciate
um appreciate Kevin for for uh coming up
with the with the original framing of
the end of you also because it just felt
like so perfect for that particular
moment
um
but I mean creating that and uh and
being able to to have people have a
space where they could drop in
um and and uh and spend time quietly it
was a real it was a real Delight but
David do you want to do you want to
speak to like where that's how that's
evolved like where where we've gone with
it because our studio really is based in
almost everything we do dances in some
way with gaian Systems Technology
ecology and right now looking on at
Living infrastructure in Southern
California
yeah I mean I think uh very specifically
pulling on the themes of relationality
and the sort of the centrality of
understanding relations how we relate to
all of you know each other but also the
non-human world
how explicit that's become I mean Nikki
was addressing this recently on a call
like how isolated people became all the
different challenges what it means to be
like ripped from your web of relations
in a tangible way
um where everything kind of becomes
virtualized and a lot of the work that
we're doing now is looking at
particularly water infrastructure in
California and the history of how water
has been treated uh kind of post three
phases of colonialism and what it takes
to kind of address the nature of this
embodied infrastructure
um and as we've gotten more and more
into it the clearer it's become like our
ideas around
infrastructure are so anti-relational
it's something that's seen as like
that's this top-down thing that comes in
and the the consistent theme that we
keep encountering is that
infrastructures that actually work are
deeply relational it's the Community
creating those infrastructures from the
inside maintaining them regenerating
them and I think that that actually
speaks back to the original themes that
we were playing with with cybernetics
and sort of our system science because
cybernetics itself there was this sort
of idea of
allopoetic systems which are kind of
created from the outside and then Auto
poetic systems that are created from the
inside and so the richness of this
experience I think of the installation
was very much about being on the inside
it wasn't just kind of a you know a
machine control feedback loop system
that was being controlled from somewhere
else it was about your own participation
and aspects of that and so they're I
don't know they're Ripple effects
they're like manifestations of the
importance of that relationality and
just about everything that we're doing
these days you know all the work really
does involve trying to bring forth an
accessibility around things that are
anti-relational like everything Kevin
was working on looking at Hunter's Point
and um and they deep you know historic
environmental justice considerations and
issues that happen there those are um
it's just a deeply anti-relational
Dynamic and we we see that all across
California are these systems
um where decisions or infrastructures
were built without consideration of the
life systems including the life systems
of the communities that were there and
so a lot of our work right now is is you
know part of the the larger effort to
unwind those systems to bring back the
health to bring back the relationality
um and that's like the relationality
with the with the green spaces and the
trees and the ability to catch water and
hold it in the land which is a big part
of the functional aspect of what we're
doing but to do that it has to be done
in a way that's deeply connected to the
voices of the people in communities
um which is you know all a constant
challenge is like how do you not see
infrastructure as is completely top down
and controlled based and paternalistic
and Colonial and instead something that
is that can be co-created for healing in
communities and so I think there's
there's many threads of um of what we
were exploring that show up in all these
different pieces
um which were really part of one big
piece these that that play with a lot of
those same same themes it's probably
worth mentioning the inordinate amount
of time that we spent sort of in
fisticuffs in the lab around some of
these ideas right like we were exploring
all kinds of concepts of like what would
it mean to give the bay a voice what
would it mean to create different types
of legal structures that recognized the
personhood of different things I mean
and it got it got pretty intense in the
lab because everybody had pretty strong
opinions about things and I don't know I
was amazed when you know Kevin came up
with the central concept that nobody
kind of gelled around and like okay good
we got it but that was pretty deep into
it was to incorporate Gaia we wanted to
incorporate the Earth that was our big
concept we landed on after a year of
meeting yeah we met we met for a really
really really long time and there was a
a really long time
incredibly long time and um from the
human scale and and I think and we had a
lot of conversations about exactly what
um I think Newton talks about
um in the clip which is like how do we
get this outside the gallery like how
much of this exists outside the context
of this room and some of our first
conversations as I just mentioned is
like okay well do we actually want the
impact of this to be like a legal impact
like do we actually do we actually go
out and like try to create a situation
where we force the you know this the
local municipal government to start
granting rights to like these things in
the streets and and how do we have like
off-site
um instantiations of this and and like
there's there's a phase where we were
talking about incorporating Gaia and it
was going to be called like everything
Incorporated like a company and and you
know we had all these slide decks and
stuff like that and I think that uh we
we pulled back a little bit because we
realized that we needed to control our
own scale of what we wanted to do in
order to be able to accomplish what we
want to accomplish because if we had
this kind of like massive undertaking
that like spanned the entire you know
city of San Francisco there was a risk
that we weren't going to be able to
accomplish it and it was going to be
worse if it was you know half-assed
right and so we wanted to make sure that
we were able to kind of like Focus all
of our energies and accomplish actually
because you know I think so Jonathan
Keats was a huge huge advocate of like a
kind of an art installation that was
essentially a legal project right like a
legal framework for accomplishing all
these things and it was something that
we were all incredibly interested in but
it became it became evident really
quickly like okay but like how does how
does this become something that people
can engage with and and because at the
end of the day you know our competition
isn't mayor London breed even though
maybe it should be it's it's actually
you know the Museum of ice cream right
and so like and and splitting that
difference between between those things
took a very long and yeah and the
unmerciful eye of the public you know
people have to come in here and have a
good you know and like enjoy it and be
right so
um I was just gonna say ultimately you
know the show was open for what three
weeks I think and 5 000 people came to
see it so I I think it had a pretty
massive impact in terms of our the scale
of art exhibitions and the amount of
people that walk through it and I got a
lot more like just for gray areas you
know metrics generally we are largest
audience
um is between the ages of like I'd say
20 for my first studies 25 to maybe 50
and so it was really great that we got a
lot of families in through that we had a
lot of children in here for the first
time I've ever seen a lot of children in
gray area and I think that having the
open and immersive exhibit also having
the idea of living systems and in
pulling in everyone at different walks
of life in different stages it just it
made it more accessible and it was
really reached a wider audience than
what we what we normally reach so it was
successful in that way yeah the other
thing about that just to mention it uh
part of what we were prototyping here
was a economic model to do collaborative
group situations and so we also did a
direct profit share with all the artists
for all of the you know quote-unquote
profit from this show and so that it we
had enough people in that that turned
out to be significant and I think really
affected our thinking of how we
structure agreements with you know in a
collaborative projects with artists from
that moving forward throughout covid we
started doing like 50 50 profit shares
for workshops for example to support the
artists who had lost a lot of their
income and revenue streams and I would
say that that was a direct direct
repercussion of the success of this show
and really kind of trying to rethink how
we can engage with artists and
relational engagement with our community
uh to support them and help them Thrive
particularly as we all face covet
together you know
and we're just getting cooking with gas
here but unfortunately I think we're out
of any any parting thoughts
for these fine people to yeah
I just said wrong metaphor
it's an induction stove we're not we're
not cooking give me a give me a better
metaphor
a question for the ages give me a better
metaphor yes
I feel like it was good trans induction
work and we're
Fortune of being able to do it with you
all
I I just want to say it's so good to see
you guys on the big screen I miss you
guys and it was it was a really it was
awesome it was an awesome experience to
do and I think that I guess if I had any
last thing to say would be that I think
you know the the coolest thing about it
kind of like what Nikki just said is
that like there there were so many ways
for so many different types of people to
get introduced to this stuff and like I
I still wonder sometimes like what's
what's the long-term effect of having
you know like a toddler do a deaf
meditation under like a an alder tree
you know or like what's what's what's
the long-term effect of having a
five-year-old look at like a geiger
counter reading of radioactivity in
their in their city and I think that in
in this sense you know if the goal of
the project was to shift and rethink
some of the relationals like the
relations that we have between art
object Community like I think that in
that sense it was incredibly effective
and I'm really excited about that and
was really proud to do that work with
everybody here so yeah thank you guys
here here
yes yeah and thank you Barry and Nikki
and the whole crew and all the artists
for like taking a chance on this it was
truly experimental
an experiential
risk taking is what we do here
um
thanks everybody
thank you
yeah so we're gonna
do a quick Tech rearrangement here and
uh be back with DeForest